KEP-3169: Fine-grained SupplementalGroups control (#3620)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/3619-supplemental-groups-policy/README.md

you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

A new field named `SupplementalGroupsPolicy` will be introduced to `PodSecurityContext`. Allowed values are:

- `RespectGroupsInImage`(_default if not specified_): This policy indicates that it _respects_ group memberships defined in the container image for the container's primary UID in supplementary groups of the first container process. Its resultant supplementary groups are 
  - the container's primary GID, 
  - the `fsGroup` (if specified), 
  - `supplementalGroups` (if specified), and 
  - the groups defined in the container image for the container's primary UID.
- `IgnoreGroupsInImage`: This policy indicates that it _ignores_ group memberships defined in the container image for the container's primary UID in supplementary groups of the first container process. Its resultant supplementary groups are
  - the container's primary GID, 
  - the `fsGroup` (if specified), and 
  - `supplementalGroups` (if specified).

> 

Reviewer: Can we list two alternatives?
1. Implement this in container runtimes as an option. The con is that it isn't portable configuration.
2. Users could modify their images to control the supplemental groups. The con is that it is more work and users won't always have an option to do that.

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

`PodSecurityContext.SupplementalGroups` is a list of groups applied to the first process run in each container, in addition to the container's primary GID, the `fsGroup` (if specified), and __group memberships defined in the container image for the UID__ of the container process. However, most cluster administrators and users would not recognize this behavior, especially regarding the groups defined in the container image.

For example, if we have a Pod like this:
```yaml
spec:
  # the primary UID will be uid=1000 in the container
  securityContext: { runAsUser:1000, runAsGroup:1000, supplementalGroups:[50000]}
  containers:
  - image: some-image # uid=1000 belongs to gid=60000 in the image
    sh: ["id"]
```

> Then, groups of the first process of the container will be :

Reviewer 2: I do not see this behavior in trivial testing - am I doing something wrong?

```
$ docker run -u 65534 ubuntu id
uid=65534(nobody) gid=65534(nogroup) groups=65534(nogroup)
```

This is correct - 65534 is the /etc/passwd group for UID 65534,

```
$ docker run -u 65534 --group-add 1 --group-add 2 ubuntu id
uid=65534(nobody) gid=65534(nogroup) groups=65534(nogroup),1(daemon),2(bin)
```

This is correct - I added groups 1 and 2, and the default group still exists.

```
$ docker run -u 65534:10 --group-add 1 --group-add 2 ubuntu id
uid=65534(nobody) gid=10(uucp) groups=10(uucp),1(daemon),2(bin)
```

I asked for a specific GID (runAsGroup equiv) and some extra.  The /etc/passwd group (65534) is not to be found.

So I seem to misunderstand the problem statement

Author: Thanks for the check. Yeah, I knew this docker's behavior. It's a kind of pitfall.

> I asked for a specific GID (runAsGroup equiv)

In [the official docker document of `USER` directive](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/#user), 
(_note: `-u` option's semantics is the same with the directive_)

> Note that when specifying a group for the user, the user will have only the specified group membership. Any other configured group memberships will be ignored.

Although I'm not sure about the original intent of specifications of `runAsGroup` and `supplementalGroups`, this behavior is NOT the same as the current the APIs' implementations.

Author: Thanks for the check. Yeah, I know this docker's behavior. I think It's a kind of pitfall.

> I asked for a specific GID (runAsGroup equiv)

In [the official docker document of `USER` directive](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/#user), 
(_note: `-u` option's semantics is the same with the directive_)

> Note that when specifying a group for the user, the user will have only the specified group membership. Any other configured group memberships will be ignored.

Although I'm not sure about the original intent of specifications of `runAsGroup` and `supplementalGroups`, this behavior is NOT the same as the current the APIs' implementations.

Reviewer 2: Is it possible this is a difference between containerd/crio/docker ?

The OCI spec (https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/config.md) says:

```
If group/gid is not specified, the default group and supplementary groups of the given user/uid in /etc/passwd from the container are applied.
```

To my reading, that says that adopting the from-passwd group is *wrong* when runAsGroup is specified.

IOW, this KEP feels like it is working around broken implementation(s) of OCI.

Am I missing something?

Author: > To my reading, that says that adopting the from-passwd group is wrong when runAsGroup is specified.

I think so.

> IOW, this KEP feels like it is working around broken implementation(s) of OCI.

Yes, I think this KEP can be said so.

However, I didn't confirm it in all the OCI implementations, but, specifying gid in [`USER` directive in Dockerfile](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/#user:~:text=USER%F0%9F%94%97,will%20be%20ignored.) or in [`config.User` property in OCI image](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/config.md) would work as expected. 

I think the broken thing is `runAsGroup`/`supplementalGroups` API's implementations by the OCI implementations(at least containerd and crio).

Thus, this KEP proposes a new API to control the behavior because changing the previous behavior is a breaking-change and will make a big impact on users even if it was a bug.

Reviewer 2: I'm not happy to add new APIs to work around spec-violating bugs.

I think we need to:

1) Confirm that this behavior exists in both containerd and crio.  (are there others we should check?)
2) File bugs against violators, citing OCI
3) Decide if they want to fix the bugs, fix the spec, or remain in violation
4) ONLY THEN can we decide if we need to add k8s level APIs

Author: > Confirm that this behavior exists in both containerd and crio. (are there others we should check?)

I already did on contained and crio. The reproduction code is [here](https://github.com/pfnet-research/strict-supplementalgroups-container-runtime/tree/reproduce-bypass-supplementalgroups#readme) (this is also cited in the original issue https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/112879 which causes the KEP).

> File bugs against violators, citing OCI

I think this bug relates to CRI spec, not OCI image spec. Affected specs are 

- https://github.com/kubernetes/cri-api/blob/master/pkg/apis/runtime/v1/api.proto#L321-L332
- https://github.com/kubernetes/cri-api/blob/master/pkg/apis/runtime/v1/api.proto#L869-L885

As I described [kubernetes/kubernetes#112879](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/112879#:~:text=Root%20Cause%3A%20ambiguous%20definition), I think the root cause would be ambiguous API definition on both on Kubernetes API (`{Pod,Container}SecurityContext.{RunAsGroup, SupplementalGroups}`) and CRI spec (`Linux{Container,Sandbox}SecurityContext.{run_as_group, supplemental_groups}`).

I updated both API definition in https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/113047.

Reviewer 2: I apologize for being a pain on this one - it just feels like an API we should not need, and I really want to understand why we do, if we do.  Also I have some history with supplemental groups, so I am shocked to see this.

I just tried to repro thru k8s - CRI to containerd

```
$ cat /tmp/p.yaml 
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  generateName: supplementalgroups-
spec:
  securityContext:
    runAsUser: 65534
    runAsGroup: 10
    supplementalGroups: [1,2]
  restartPolicy: Never
  containers:
  - image: ubuntu
    name: main
    command: ["bash", "-c", "id; true"]

$ k create -f /tmp/p.yaml
pod/supplementalgroups-5w9fr created

$ k logs supplementalgroups-5w9fr
uid=65534(nobody) gid=10(uucp) groups=10(uucp),1(daemon),2(bin)
```

That does not show the problem that you are supposedly fixing.

What am I doing wrong?  

Assuming I am doing something wrong:

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/112879 immediately strikes out the "fix the bug" option as a breaking change.  I am usually on the side of not breaking things that work, but this is  a) a clear spec violation; b) a bug in one or more runtimes which would be a candidate to fix at those levels and then break us anyway; c) shocking behavior from a security POV.  I don't see the discussion about whether to actually fix this or not - did that discussion happen?

Before we merge new API surface to work around this, I'd like to see code citations - where EXACTLY is this happening?  Some piece of code must be looking at the OCI image, extracting the group ID, and adding it to supplementalGroups - I'd like to hear from the owner(s) of that code about why they think this is correct interpretation of OCI.

Finally, if we do fix it, I'd also want to see something at those code-sites that prevents future people from fixing the bug - because it seems pretty clearly a bug to me, and broken things have a tendency to get fixed.

But first and foremost - I can't reproduce this, and it worries me.

Author: > I apologize for being a pain on this one - it just feels like an API we should not need, and I really want to understand why we do, if we do. Also I have some history with supplemental groups, so I am shocked to see this.

Thank you for this kind comment. I also didn't want to change Kubernetes API but to just fix the original issue. I think we're on the same page. I'm really happy to discuss what the best way is. Yeah, I was so shocked when I found the behavior, too.

> But first and foremost - I can't reproduce this, and it worries me.

Hmmm, It is strange (but I see why this happens now, see below). I also confirmed [the reproduction code is still effective](https://github.com/pfnet-research/strict-supplementalgroups-container-runtime/tree/reproduce-bypass-supplementalgroups#readme). It needs an explicit member list part in the /etc/group entries.

```shell
# using a custom image:
#   user alice belongs to alice(self group) and bypassed-group
#   Dockerfile: https://github.com/pfnet-research/strict-supplementalgroups-container-runtime/blob/reproduce-bypass-supplementalgroups/Dockerfile
$ docker run everpeace/kubernetes-issue-112879 cat /etc/group
...
bypassed-group:x:50000:alice
alice:x:1000:

$ cat /tmp/p.yaml 
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  generateName: bypass-supplementalgroups-pod-
spec:
  securityContext:
    runAsUser: 1000 
    runAsGroup: 1000
    supplementalGroups: [60000]
  restartPolicy: Never
  containers:
  - image: everpeace/kubernetes-issue-112879
    name: main
    command: ["bash", "-c", "id; true"]
    imagePullPolicy: Never

$ k create -f /tmp/p.yaml
pod/bypass-supplementalgroups-pod-nvx7l created

# 50000(defined in /etc/groups) appears!!
$ k logs pod/bypass-supplementalgroups-pod-nvx7l
uid=1000(alice) gid=1000(alice) groups=1000(alice),50000(bypassed-group),60000
```

> Before we merge new API surface to work around this, I'd like to see code citations - where EXACTLY is this happening?

In contained, I think the below code causes the situation

- `containerSpecOpts` is called in `CreateContainer`: https://github.com/containerd/containerd/blob/v1.6.16/pkg/cri/server/container_create.go#L230
- in `containerSpecOpts`, configuring OCI container spec, especially [user configuration](https://github.com/opencontainers/runtime-spec/blob/main/config.md#user): https://github.com/containerd/containerd/blob/v1.6.16/pkg/cri/server/container_create_linux.go#L325-L351
- in coantainerSpecOpts, even if `runAsGroup` is specified, scanning /etc/passwd by calling `customopts.WithAdditionalGIDs`: https://github.com/containerd/containerd/blob/v1.6.16/pkg/cri/server/container_create_linux.go#L351
- `customopts.WithAdditionalGIDs` just delegates to `oci.WithAdditionalGIDs`: https://github.com/containerd/containerd/blob/v1.6.16/pkg/cri/opts/spec_linux.go#L54
- `oci.WithAdditionalGIDs` actually scan's /etc/passwd and resolves additional gids: https://github.com/containerd/containerd/blob/v1.6.16/oci/spec_opts.go#L738:6
- _They explicitly exclude the group having the same name with the username. This is why nobody(65534) doesn't appear in your case_: https://github.com/containerd/containerd/blob/v1.6.16/oci/spec_opts.go#L763-L766

> https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/112879 immediately strikes out the "fix the bug" option as a breaking change. I am usually on the side of not breaking things that work, but this is a) a clear spec violation; b) a bug in one or more runtimes which would be a candidate to fix at those levels and then break us anyway; c) shocking behavior from a security POV. I don't see the discussion about whether to actually fix this or not - did that discussion happen?

Yes, as described ["Is this a security issue??" section in kubernetes#112879](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/112879#:~:text=Is%20this%20a%20security%20issue%3F%3F) we firstly reported this behavior to hackerone.com(`#1688374`) by following [Kubernetes Security and Disclosure Information](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/issues-security/security/). Kubernetes Security Response Committee responded that this behavior "works as intended," and they recommended discussing how to handle this behavior in a public k/k issue.

And then, I posted the issue in the sig-node meetings, and sig [recommended me](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/112879#:~:text=How%20to%20resolve%20this%20issue%3F) to improve API definition first and discuss how to fix the issue(it's current status).

---

> https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/112879 immediately strikes out the "fix the bug" option as a breaking change

Then, once you confirmed this issue is "the bug", the next step would share the bug and spec of `runAsGroups` with major CRI runtime communities: contained, cri-o, and others?

Reviewer 2: OK, let's try to repro it again:

```
$ docker run -ti ubuntu
root@624168bd5677:/# echo thockin:x:9376:9376:root:/tmp:/bin/bash >>/etc/passwd
root@624168bd5677:/# echo thockin:x:9376: >> /etc/group
root@624168bd5677:/# echo extra:x:9377:thockin >> /etc/group
root@624168bd5677:/# echo extra2:x:9378:thockin >> /etc/group
root@624168bd5677:/# exit

$ docker commit 624168bd5677
sha256:0c6fbb0fbd1bc1a2d1e0011c78ccc43869e997f7f633fa3dc9acce52aa2c352f

$ docker tag sha256:0c6fbb0fbd1bc1a2d1e0011c78ccc43869e997f7f633fa3dc9acce52aa2c352f thockin/supplemental

$ docker run -ti -u thockin thockin/supplemental id
uid=9376(thockin) gid=9376(thockin) groups=9376(thockin),9377(extra),9378(extra2)

$ docker run -ti -u thockin:thockin thockin/supplemental id
uid=9376(thockin) gid=9376(thockin) groups=9376(thockin)

$ docker run -ti -u thockin:10 thockin/supplemental id
uid=9376(thockin) gid=10(uucp) groups=10(uucp)
```

docker itself seems OK

Let's try k8s:

```
$ cat /tmp/p.yaml 
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  generateName: supplementalgroups-
spec:
  securityContext:
    runAsUser: 9376
    runAsGroup: 10
  restartPolicy: Never
  containers:
  - image: thockin/supplemental
    name: main
    command: ["bash", "-c", "id; true"]

$ k create -f /tmp/p.yaml -o name
pod/supplementalgroups-29n4q

$ k logs pod/supplementalgroups-29n4q
uid=9376(thockin) gid=10(uucp) groups=10(uucp),9377(extra),9378(extra2)
```

Aha!  That is different.

Let's try nerdctl:

```
$ nerdctl run --net=none -ti -u thockin thockin/supplemental id
uid=9376(thockin) gid=9376(thockin) groups=9376(thockin),9377(extra),9378(extra2)

$ /var/run/docker/nerdctl run --net=none -ti -u thockin:thockin thockin/supplemental id
uid=9376(thockin) gid=9376(thockin) groups=9376(thockin)

$ /var/run/docker/nerdctl run --net=none -ti -u thockin:10 thockin/supplemental id
uid=9376(thockin) gid=10(uucp) groups=10(uucp)
```

That seems correct.  So the issue is in containerd CRI impl - containerd gets it right on one path and wrong on another.  I don't want to know what pathology leads to that...

Thanks for your patience.  I think I am now caught up to what you wrote.

I think it is a security issue, but not a major one, probably.  More importantly, I think we have a divergence from the OCI spec, and that's the important thing.  I do not think it is an intentional or meaningful divergence (at the k8s layer).  The questions I have then are:

* Do containerd and CRI-O owners think the current behavior is OCI compliant?
* Do containerd and CRI-O owners think the current behavior is a feature (because they interpret k8s as demanding it) or a a bug (oops)?
* If they agree it's not OCI and probably not what was intended, should we codify it into k8s API (compatibility) or fix it?
* If they agree not to fix it, do they have sufficient tests and docs/comments in place that nobody will "accidentially" fix it later?

Reviewer 2: @estesp if you have a moment wrt containerd

@jonjohnsonjr if you have a moment - do you have an opinion about whether this is OCI compliant?  I think the k8s/CRI behavior is wrong, but the OCI spec doesn't QUITE say so.

Reviewer 3: I'd defer to @vbatts or @tianon -- image-spec -> runtime-spec is not in my wheelhouse.

Reviewer: @thockin Thanks for digging into this. I think that we should fix the CRI runtimes. I assumed docker behaved this way and the CRIs were retaining that behavior but that isn't the case.  I am :+1: to fixing CRI runtimes for this.

Reviewer: cc: @mikebrow for containerd.

Reviewer 4: @thockin's understanding (and thorough testing, as usual :heart:) matches my own :+1:

However, FWIW from the OCI perspective, this _is_ defined in the image-spec (the runtime-spec only defines the object that includes the final `uid`/`gid`/`additionalGids`; https://github.com/opencontainers/runtime-spec/blob/5cfc4c32c234bf00ef9e4bdee0576af25dc23629/config.md#posix-platform-user vs `config.User` in https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/2fb996805b3734779bf9a3a84dc9a9691ad7efdd/config.md).

Reviewer 2: The image spec says "If group/gid is not specified, the default group and supplementary groups of the given user/uid in /etc/passwd from the container are applied."

It doesn't say anything about /etc/group (that's a nitpick) and it doesn't say that supplementary groups from the container will be (ignored | merged) when group or gid is specified.

I interpretted it to mean "ignored" when GID is specified, and Docker and containerd defailt impl agrees with me.  It seems that k8s and CRI were interpreting it as "merged".  Maybe the spec should say explicitly what is correct.

Reviewer 4: Yeah, I think the original intent there was that "supplementary groups" was "the groups from /etc/group" since passwd and group are usually a pair, but that'd be a fair update to clarify in the spec IMO.

Reviewer: The image spec statement covers  the interpretation of config.User in the image metadata (derived from USER in a Dockerfile). When we are explicitly overriding that by setting RunAsUser, RunAsGroup or SupplementalGroups in SecurityContext that is a runtime override and I think that behavior should be defined in k8s/CRI spec and backed by additional tests.

Reviewer 2: I'm not saying we shouldn't define it, just that it would be surprising to me if we defined it _differently_ than OCI.

That said, it's a breaking change for us (in theory - I doubt very much it will impact anyone), so maybe we have to.

Author: Thank you guys for the discussion! No matter whether the implementation gap is intended or not intended, I also agree the gap should be fixed in some way. So, wrapping up, I feel we agreed on the below:

- CRI runtimes(at least containerd, crio and more) should be fixed, and
- We should introduce clear k8s/CRI spec about this (i.e. keep reviewing the KEP for how to fix k8s/CRI).

Is my understanding correct?

---

> I think that behavior should be defined in k8s/CRI spec and backed by additional tests.

Regarding CRI tests, [kubernetes-sigs/cri-tools](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cri-tools) ships [`critest` (CRI validation testing tool)](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cri-tools/blob/master/docs/validation.md) for CRI implementors. I think adding the test cases to the tool would be a standard way for it.

By the way, I recently added SupplementalGroups behavioral tests which assert the _current_ behavior (incompatible with OCI image spec) in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cri-tools/pull/1005. I will also add test cases for `SupplementalGroupsPolicy` if the KEP is approved.

Thus, this KEP proposes to offer a new API field named `SupplementalGroupsPolicy` that customize to respect/ignore the group membership of the primary UID of the container defined in the container image when applying `SupplementalGroups` to the container processes. The new API allows cluster administrators to deploy security policies that protect the `SupplementalGroupsPolicy` field in the cluster to avoid the unexpected bypass of `SupplementalGroups` described above.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

> To Provide a new API field to control how the groups of the first process in the container are calculated.

Reviewer: I would rephrase this as controlling exactly which groups the container process belongs to rather than talk about the implementation here.

Author: Thanks, I put a below change:

```suggestion
To Provide a new API field to control exactly which groups the container process belongs to.
```

Author: [5f4e833](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3620/commits/5f4e83397cda79f4bdc692640ecf5da527f9f06e)

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

> N/A

Reviewer: Maybe cluster wide control for this.

Author: I'll put the below change:

```suggestion
To provide a cluster-wide control method.
```

Author: changed in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3620/commits/e7ffe1e8821a918d9114a9c86c9928885e0302b2

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

A new field named `SupplementalGroupsPolicy` will be introduced to `PodSecurityContext`. Allowed values are:

- `RespectGroupsInImage`(_default if not specified_): This policy indicates that it _respects_ group memberships defined in the container image for the container's primary UID in supplementary groups of the first container process. Its resultant supplementary groups are 
  - the container's primary GID, 
  - the `fsGroup` (if specified), 
  - `supplementalGroups` (if specified), and 
  - the groups defined in the container image for the container's primary UID.

> - `IgnoreGroupsInImage`: This policy indicates that it _ignores_ group memberships defined in the container image for the container's primary UID in supplementary groups of the first container process. Its resultant supplementary groups are

Author: I think boolean is enough in this case. However, I understand kubernetes API prefers to be more descriptive. For example, [NodeInclusionPolicy](https://github.com/kubernetes/api/blob/v0.26.0/core/v1/types.go#L3492-L3501) is defined enum-like type value (`Ignore` or `Honor`) although the policy could be defined in boolean. Does this make sense in this case?

> - `IgnoreGroupsInImage`: This policy indicates that it _ignores_ group memberships defined in the container image for the container's primary UID in supplementary groups of the first container process. Its resultant supplementary groups are

Author: I think boolean is enough in this case. However, I understand kubernetes API prefers to be more descriptive. For example, [NodeInclusionPolicy](https://github.com/kubernetes/api/blob/v0.26.0/core/v1/types.go#L3492-L3501) is defined enum-like type value (`Ignore` or `Honor`) although the policy could be defined in boolean. Does this make sense in this case?

> - `IgnoreGroupsInImage`: This policy indicates that it _ignores_ group memberships defined in the container image for the container's primary UID in supplementary groups of the first container process. Its resultant supplementary groups are

Reviewer 2: API wise we do suggect to avoid boolean fields.  As hard as it is to imagine a different value, we know our ability to predict the future is poor.

> - `IgnoreGroupsInImage`: This policy indicates that it _ignores_ group memberships defined in the container image for the container's primary UID in supplementary groups of the first container process. Its resultant supplementary groups are

Reviewer 2: Can we also please document this to say that "Respect" diverges from OCI, while "Ignore" is OCI compatible.

> - `IgnoreGroupsInImage`: This policy indicates that it _ignores_ group memberships defined in the container image for the container's primary UID in supplementary groups of the first container process. Its resultant supplementary groups are

Author: I added notes for this in 1d81a877f01fd735f822862afc944478479e0c2d. PTAL.

	// SecurityGroupsPolicyRespectGroupsInImage indicates that 
  // it respects group memberships defined in the container image 
  // for the container's primary UID in supplementary groups of the 
  // first container process.
  // The resultant its supplementary groups are 
  // the container's primary GID, the fsGroup (if specified), 
  // supplementalGroups(if specified), and the groups defined in 
  // the container image for the container's primary UID.
	SecurityGroupsPolicyRespectGroupsInImage PodSecurityGroupsPolicy = "RespectGroupsInImage"

	// SecurityGroupsPolicyIgnoreGroupsInImage indicates that 
  // it ignores group memberships defined in the container image 
  // for the container's primary UID in supplementary groups of the 
  // first container process.
  // The resultant its supplementary groups are 
  // the container's primary GID, the fsGroup (if specified), 
  // supplementalGroups(if specified).
	SecurityGroupsPolicyIgnoreGroupsInImage PodSecurityGroupsPolicy = "IgnoreGroupsInImage"
)
```

cri-spec (both on `v1` and `v1alpha2`) also needs to be updated similarly because of the change:

```proto
enum SupplementalGroupsPolicy {
    RespectGroupsInImage = 0;

>     IgnoreGroupsInImage = 1;

Reviewer: Should this be a boolean? Do we foresee other policies to be added in the future here?

Author: > Should this be a boolean?

Please see the above comment

> Do we foresee other policies to be added in the future here?

I don't see other policies right now. But I understand more descriptive API is preferred in this case as I wrote in

- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->

## Alternatives

<!--
What other approaches did you consider, and why did you rule them out? These do
not need to be as detailed as the proposal, but should include enough
information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.
-->

### Introducing `RutimeClass`

As described in the [Motivation](#motivation) section, cluster administrators would need to deploy a custom low-level container runtime(e.g., [pfnet-research/strict-supplementalgroups-container-runtime](https://github.com/pfnet-research/strict-supplementalgroups-container-runtime)) that modifies OCI container runtime spec(`config.json`) produced by CRI implementations (e.g., containerd, cri-o). A custom `RuntimeClass` would be introduced for it.

### Adjusting container image by users

> Users could modify their container images to control the supplemental groups (i.e., modifying group memberships of the uid of the container). Although it is more work and users won't always have the option to do that.

Reviewer 2: Another alternative is "fixing CRI implementations", with the main downside being a breaking change.

Author: added in 1791f43ea02ac07eb3d3076b757a98673a71e26b

> # KEP-3619: Fine-grained SupplementalGroups control

Reviewer 5: please add the file into Production readiness review folder like this: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/prod-readiness/sig-node/127.yaml

Author: @SergeyKanzhelev thanks. I added the PRR approval request file in [31cc312](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3620/commits/31cc3128a3c08f0314ba16c3cdb5598965a8efb2)

  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

> ## Summary

Reviewer 5: Am I understanding correct that this is the scope:

```suggestion
## Summary

The KEP seeking to fix the bug with how Container Runtimes (Containerd and CRI-O) are applying `SupplementalGroups` to the container processes. The KEP describe the work needed to be done in Kubernetes or connected projects to make sure customers has a clear migration path - including detection and safe upgrade - if any of their workflows took a dependency on this erroneous behavior.
```

Reviewer 5: cc: @mrunalp @mikebrow

Author: Yeah, I think so. I'm waiting for response from other reviewers. Once reviewers responded, I will commit your suggestion and try to write up about migration(detection and safe upgrade).

Reviewer: Yes, this is good :+1:

Reviewer 6: s/fix the bug/address the behavior/
s/erroneous/arguably erroneous/

Author: I re-written "Summary" section in df6ebc2ce0270dbd4b415b5440bdae36091c76ac. PTAL.

> `PodSecurityContext.SupplementalGroups` is a list of groups applied to the first process run in each container, in addition to the container's primary GID, the `fsGroup` (if specified), and __group memberships defined in the container image for the UID__ of the container process. However, most cluster administrators and users would not recognize this behavior, especially regarding the groups defined in the container image.

Reviewer 5: if above suggestion summarizes the scope of the KEP, this may need to be moved into separate section

Author: If so, how about this?

```markdown
## Summary
### The issue
### Steps to reproduce
...
```

Author: > It's unclear from summary whether "fix the bug" means "change the default behavior" or "provide a way to choose correct behavior". I think the summary should make that disitinction clear.

Let's make it with "provide a way to choose correct behavior". I will do it later.

Author: I re-written "Summary" section in df6ebc2ce0270dbd4b415b5440bdae36091c76ac. PTAL.

> For example, if we have a Pod like this:

Reviewer 5: Let's create a section "Steps to reproduce" for this example

Author: Sure, I will. See <t.b.d.>

Author: I re-written "Summary" section in df6ebc2ce0270dbd4b415b5440bdae36091c76ac. PTAL.

Thus, this KEP proposes to offer a new API field named `SupplementalGroupsPolicy` that customize to respect/ignore the group membership of the primary UID of the container defined in the container image when applying `SupplementalGroups` to the container processes. The new API allows cluster administrators to deploy security policies that protect the `SupplementalGroupsPolicy` field in the cluster to avoid the unexpected bypass of `SupplementalGroups` described above.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

> To Provide a new API field to control exactly which groups the container process belongs to.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Work with Container Runtimes to provide a configuration to apply the fix or keep the existing behavior
- Ensure there is a clear steps documented for end users to detect if their workload is affected 
- (Optional) provide helper APIs and/or tooling to simplify the detection

To Provide a new API field to control exactly which groups the container process belongs to.
```

Author: I put off committing the suggestion right now. see: t.b.d.

Reviewer 5: definitely, thank you!

Author: added in 166d1998b2e0ab3a992f814e8f1020efa2697ace. PTAL.

### Non-Goals

> <!--

Reviewer 5: Is it a goal to not change OCI spec? Or we want it in goals to make sure that OCI spec is clear(-er)?

```suggestion
 - Change the OCI specification
 
<!--
```

Author: As tim verified in [the thread](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3620#discussion_r1089848576), containerd is ok via containerd's API directly(by nerdctl), however containerd via cri  (by kubernetes) is not ok.

So, I think OCI spec(both on container and image) is clear enough:
- [`User in config.json`](https://github.com/opencontainers/runtime-spec/blob/main/config.md#user), and 
- [`config.User` in image spec](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/3a7f492d3f1bcada656a7d8c08f3f9bbd05e7406/config.md#:~:text=User%20string%2C%20OPTIONAL).

In my understanding, we should fix(make clearer) k8s API and CRI specs:

- [PodSecurityContext.RunAsGroup](https://github.com/everpeace/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/apis/core/types.go#L3116-L3123)
- [PodSecurityContext.SupplementalGroups](https://github.com/everpeace/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/apis/core/types.go#L3133-L3138)
- [SecurityContext.RunAsGroup](https://github.com/everpeace/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/apis/core/types.go#L5487-L5493)
- [LinuxSandboxSecurityContext.run\_as\_group](https://github.com/kubernetes/cri-api/blob/master/pkg/apis/runtime/v1/api.proto#L321-L323)
- [LinuxSandboxSecurityContext.supplemental\_groups](https://github.com/kubernetes/cri-api/blob/master/pkg/apis/runtime/v1/api.proto#L326-L332)
- [LinuxContainerSecurityContext.run\_as\_group](https://github.com/kubernetes/cri-api/blob/master/pkg/apis/runtime/v1/api.proto#L869-L872)
- [LinuxContainerSecurityContext.supplemental\_groups](https://github.com/kubernetes/cri-api/blob/master/pkg/apis/runtime/v1/api.proto#L879-L885).

Reviewer 5: oh, I misunderstood a bit. Still catching up. I thought there was comment that OCI spec wasn't 100% precise.

Reviewer 6: oci spec does not cover k8s, cri api, or docker cli options.. 

oci specs are .. lower level

Reviewer 2: OCI image-spec (https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/config.md)  says:

"""
If group/gid is not specified, the default group and supplementary groups of the given user/uid in /etc/passwd from the container are applied.
"""

I think it should be updated to something like:

"""
If group/gid is not specified, the default group and supplementary groups of the given user/uid in /etc/passwd and /etc/group from the container are applied.  If group/gid is specified, supplementary groups from the container are ignored.
"""

Additionally, https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/conversion.md says:

"""
a converter SHOULD set the value of process.user.additionalGids to a value corresponding to the user in the container's context described by Config.User. For Unix-like systems, this MAY involve resolution through NSS or parsing /etc/group and determining the group memberships of the user specified in process.user.uid. If the value of user in Config.User is numeric, the converter SHOULD NOT modify process.user.additionalGids
"""

I think this needs to be updated to something like:

"""
a converter SHOULD set the value of process.user.additionalGids to a value corresponding to the user in the container's context described by Config.User. For Unix-like systems, this MAY involve resolution through NSS or parsing /etc/group and determining the group memberships of the user specified in process.user.uid. If the value of user in Config.User is numeric or if Config.user specifies a group, the converter SHOULD NOT modify process.user.additionalGids
"""

That clarifies the existing behaviors.  The question remains as to whether OCI should say anything about `additionalGids` when `Config.user` does not specify a group. 

IOW: `docker` and `nerdctl` seem to define `--group-add` as "adding a group on top of the default OCI behavior".  I think Kubernetes should define `supplementalGroups` as "replacing the OCI default behavior", whether `runAsGroup` is defined or not.

The production readiness review questionnaire must be completed and approved
for the KEP to move to `implementable` status and be included in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

<!--
Pick one of these and delete the rest.

Documentation is available on [feature gate lifecycle] and expectations, as
well as the [existing list] of feature gates.

[feature gate lifecycle]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[existing list]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/
-->

> - [ ] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)

Reviewer 7: 👋  I was going to give his a first pass PRR review, as I see it's marked for inclusion in 1.27 but I see this hasn't been updated yet. 

We'll need the alpha relevant sections completed if you're intending to target this for alpha in 1.27.

Author: I filled out alpha-relevant sections in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3620/commits/b39d1c58e7238f0c059f472b682a5aa2cee9d5a3

Please note that this PR is heavily in discussion. The answers of questionnaire is subject to change.

[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

`PodSecurityContext.SupplementalGroups` is a list of groups applied to the first process run in each container, in addition to the container's primary GID, the `fsGroup` (if specified), and __group memberships defined in the container image for the UID__ of the container process. However, most cluster administrators and users would not recognize this behavior, especially regarding the groups defined in the container image.

For example, if we have a Pod like this:
```yaml
spec:
  # the primary UID will be uid=1000 in the container
  securityContext: { runAsUser:1000, runAsGroup:1000, supplementalGroups:[50000]}
  containers:
  - image: some-image # uid=1000 belongs to gid=60000 in the image
    sh: ["id"]
```
Then, groups of the first process of the container will be :
- `1000`: specified by `runAsGroup`
- `50000`: specified by `supplementalGroups`
- `60000`: defined in the image (<strong><em>Note: Kubernetes keep this</em></strong>)

Thus, the container logs will be:

```console
uid=1000(...) gid=1000(...) groups=1000(...),50000,60000(...)

> ```

Author: I re-written "Summary" section in df6ebc2ce0270dbd4b415b5440bdae36091c76ac. 
In this commit, I mention the behavior is inconsistent to OCI image spec. PTAL.

> ```

Reviewer 6: we should discuss this.. IMO the oci spec is not covering the steps / concepts for applying changes to the config.json of the container before it has been passed to runc. Rather the oci specs are regarding the image itself, the config.json definition/platforms and what is expected to happen in a runc compatible runtime when it receives the rootfs and config.json.

> ```

Reviewer 2: The image spec says 

"""
If group/gid is not specified, the default group and supplementary groups of the given user/uid in /etc/passwd from the container are applied
"""

So either it intends to define the runtime behavior rather OR that clause should be stricken entirely.

?

	// +optional
	SupplementalGroupsPolicy *PodSecurityGroupsPolicy 
}

type PodSecurityGroupsPolicy string
const (
	// SecurityGroupsPolicyRespectGroupsInImage indicates that 
  // it respects group memberships defined in the container image 
  // for the container's primary UID in supplementary groups of the 
  // first container process.
  // The resultant its supplementary groups are 
  // the container's primary GID, the fsGroup (if specified), 
  // supplementalGroups(if specified), and the groups defined in 
  // the container image for the container's primary UID.
	SecurityGroupsPolicyRespectGroupsInImage PodSecurityGroupsPolicy = "RespectGroupsInImage"

	// SecurityGroupsPolicyIgnoreGroupsInImage indicates that 
  // it ignores group memberships defined in the container image 
  // for the container's primary UID in supplementary groups of the 
  // first container process.
  // The resultant its supplementary groups are 
  // the container's primary GID, the fsGroup (if specified), 
  // supplementalGroups(if specified).
	SecurityGroupsPolicyIgnoreGroupsInImage PodSecurityGroupsPolicy = "IgnoreGroupsInImage"
)
```

> cri-spec (both on `v1` and `v1alpha2`) also needs to be updated similarly because of the change:

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3620#discussion_r1095158441

I feel pretty strongly now that we need to return the "actual results" information and publish it in the pod status.  I know it's an expansion of scope, but after analyzing it, it's just TOO confusing for us to not tell the user what ultimately happened.

  - Components depending on the feature gate: kube-apiserver, kubelet, (and CRI implementations(e.g. containerd, cri-o))
- [ ] Other
  - Describe the mechanism:
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime of the control
    plane?
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime or reprovisioning
    of a node? (Do not assume `Dynamic Kubelet Config` feature is enabled).

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

<!--
Any change of default behavior may be surprising to users or break existing
automations, so be extremely careful here.
-->
No. Just introducing new API fields in Pod spec and CRI which does NOT change the default behavior.

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

<!--
Describe the consequences on existing workloads (e.g., if this is a runtime
feature, can it break the existing applications?).

Feature gates are typically disabled by setting the flag to `false` and
restarting the component. No other changes should be necessary to disable the
feature.

NOTE: Also set `disable-supported` to `true` or `false` in `kep.yaml`.
-->

> Yes. It can be disabled after enabled. However, users should pay attention that gids of container processes in pods with `IgnoreGroupsInImage` policy would change. It means the action might break the application in permission. We plan to provide a way for users to detect which pods are affected.

Author: > When an end user wants to disable this feature after it has been enabled, which components will need to be restarted? 

kube-apiserver, kubelet, and probably container runtimes.

> Will the permissions break in running pods or will that impact only come if they are restarted?

No impact for running pods. Impacts are only restarted pods.

> What will the mechanism to detect affected pods look like?

It's still in discussion but, 

- We would change CRI to return actual uid/gid/supplemental groups information.
- kubelet publish some events or pod status about it.

> Yes. It can be disabled after enabled. However, users should pay attention that gids of container processes in pods with `IgnoreGroupsInImage` policy would change. It means the action might break the application in permission. We plan to provide a way for users to detect which pods are affected.

Reviewer 2: The simplest "does this even potentially impact me" would be:

* CRI returns current UID, GID, supplemental groups
* kubelet publishes those via pod status
* user compares pod status vs spec to see if there were any extra groups applied

Slightly better might be a condition from kubelet indicating "extra groups were applied" and recommending the stricter policy.

For people who are not affected, they can choose to enact a gatekeeper policy or something to force the strict setting.  For people who are affected, they can go figure out if it really matters or not for those specific pods.

> Yes. It can be disabled after enabled. However, users should pay attention that gids of container processes in pods with `IgnoreGroupsInImage` policy would change. It means the action might break the application in permission. We plan to provide a way for users to detect which pods are affected.

Author: See https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3620#discussion_r1099677775. I added `ContainerStatus.User` field in the KEP for users/admins to know the actual identities attached to the containers' process.

> If `group`/`gid` is not specified, the default group and supplementary groups of the given `user`/`uid` in `/etc/passwd` from the container are applied.

As described in [kubernetes/kubernetes#112879](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/112879), the behavior is not documented well and is not widely known by most Kubernetes administrators and users. Moreover, this behavior causes security considerations in some cases.

### Steps to reproduce

Assume you have an image and a Pod manifest:

```Dockerfile
# Dockerfile
FROM ubuntu:22.04

> # This generates /etc/group entry --> "group-in-image:x:60000:alice"
> RUN groupadd -g 60000 group-in-image \

Author: ```suggestion
# This generates /etc/group entry --> "group-in-image:x:50000:alice"
RUN groupadd -g 50000 group-in-image \
```

    && useradd -m -u 1000 alice \
    && gpasswd -a alice group-in-image
USER alice
```

```yaml
spec:
  # This overrides 
  # - USER directive in Dockerfile above by runAsUser and runAsGroup with "1000:1000", and 
  # - setting supplementalGroups
  # This spec expects NOT to attach gids defined in the image(/etc/group) to the container process
  # because this specifies gid by runAsGroup explicitly.
  securityContext: { runAsUser:1000, runAsGroup:1000, supplementalGroups:[60000]}
  containers:
    # Expected output: "uid=1000(alice) gid=1000(alice) groups=1000(alice),60000"
    # NOTE: "group-in-image" is not included here 
    #       because groups defined in /etc/group should not be attached
    #       when gids is specified in runAsGroup
  - image: the-image-above
    sh: ["id"] 
```

However, the current combination with Kubernetes and major containter runtimes(at least containerd and cri-o) outputs(See [here](https://github.com/pfnet-research/strict-supplementalgroups-container-runtime/tree/reproduce-bypass-supplementalgroups) for more detailed reproduction code) includes "group-in-image" group of the first container process.

```console

> uid=1000(alice) gid=1000(alice) groups=1000(alice),50000(group-in-image),60000

Reviewer 8: What is 50000?

Author: just an example.

`/etc/group` in the image contains the line:

```
group-in-image:x:60000:alice
```

Kubernetes provides no API surface to prevent this bypass, although it could sometimes lead to a security concern. Because the behavior is implemented in CRI implementations actually, To mitigate this, the cluster administrators will need to deploy a custom low-level container runtime(e.g., [pfnet-research/strict-supplementalgroups-container-runtime](https://github.com/pfnet-research/strict-supplementalgroups-container-runtime)) that modifies OCI container runtime spec(`config.json`) produced by CRI implementations (e.g., containerd, cri-o). A custom `RuntimeClass` would be introduced for it. Nevertheless, It would be an extra operational burden for cluster administrators.

Thus, this KEP proposes to offer a new API field named `SupplementalGroupsPolicy` that enables OCI-compliant behavior for supplemental groups to the first container process. The new API allows cluster administrators to deploy security policies that protect the `SupplementalGroupsPolicy` field in the cluster to avoid the unexpected bypass of `SupplementalGroups` described above.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

> - To Provide a new API field to control exactly which groups the container process belongs to

Reviewer 5: how strong do we believe this must be per-Pod or just a global setting on a Runtime? As long as there is a way to check that current workload is not affected, switching a global flag sounds like a better solution long term.

Or there is a use for this setting after every implementation has migrated to the new behavior?

Reviewer 2: How do you check it is not affected?

Reviewer 5: we may need to get this from runtime. If changing it for the Pod and seeing if something breaks the only option for end users - it sounds bad. Also I'm not sure if this field will be useful long term. Do you think we will need it?

Reviewer 5: Ultimately I am trying to understand if there are set of Goals we can set for 1.27 to get this KEP approved for 1.27 and decide on specifics later during implementation.

Reviewer 2: Well, we either need a breaking change or an API, I think. And APIs are forever.

I am ready to ACK an API if we can get the semantic roughly described including how to know if this might impact you (status).

Author: I added `ContainerStatus.User` proposal in the KEP for users/admins to know the actual identities attached to the container processes in 8b3e39b07b8a436aa4070e0a9d96f36ed6a16760. PTAL.

	// +optional
	SupplementalGroupsPolicy *PodSecurityGroupsPolicy 
}

type PodSecurityGroupsPolicy string
const (
	// SecurityGroupsPolicyRespectGroupsInImage indicates that 
  // it respects group memberships defined in the container image 
  // for the container's primary UID in supplementary groups of the 
  // first container process.
  // The resultant its supplementary groups are 
  // the container's primary GID, the fsGroup (if specified), 
  // supplementalGroups(if specified), and the groups defined in 
  // the container image for the container's primary UID.
	SecurityGroupsPolicyRespectGroupsInImage PodSecurityGroupsPolicy = "RespectGroupsInImage"

	// SecurityGroupsPolicyIgnoreGroupsInImage indicates that 
  // it ignores group memberships defined in the container image 
  // for the container's primary UID in supplementary groups of the 
  // first container process.
  // The resultant its supplementary groups are 
  // the container's primary GID, the fsGroup (if specified), 
  // supplementalGroups(if specified).
	SecurityGroupsPolicyIgnoreGroupsInImage PodSecurityGroupsPolicy = "IgnoreGroupsInImage"
)
```

> cri-spec (both on `v1` and `v1alpha2`) also needs to be updated similarly because of the change:

Reviewer 5: v1alpha2 is not supported any longer

```suggestion
cri-spec (`v1`) also needs to be updated similarly because of the change:
```

Author: fixed in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3620/commits/359baaf37f1b85266b439367340728dc4f0c3e1b

  # - setting supplementalGroups
  # This spec expects NOT to attach gids defined in the image(/etc/group) to the container process
  # because this specifies gid by runAsGroup explicitly.
  securityContext: { runAsUser:1000, runAsGroup:1000, supplementalGroups:[60000]}
  containers:
    # Expected output: "uid=1000(alice) gid=1000(alice) groups=1000(alice),60000"
    # NOTE: "group-in-image" is not included here 
    #       because groups defined in /etc/group should not be attached
    #       when gids is specified in runAsGroup
  - image: the-image-above
    sh: ["id"] 
```

However, the current combination with Kubernetes and major containter runtimes(at least containerd and cri-o) outputs(See [here](https://github.com/pfnet-research/strict-supplementalgroups-container-runtime/tree/reproduce-bypass-supplementalgroups) for more detailed reproduction code) includes "group-in-image" group of the first container process.

```console
uid=1000(alice) gid=1000(alice) groups=1000(alice),50000(group-in-image),60000
```

## Motivation

As described above, gids attached to the first container process is not OCI image spec compliant when `runAsGroup` is specified in `SecurityContext`.

> Moreover, this causes security considerations as follows. When a cluster enforces some security policy for pods that protects the value of `RunAsGroup` and `SupplementalGroups`, the effect of its enforcement is limited, i.e., cluster users can easily bypass the policy enforcement just by using a custom image. If such a bypass happened, it would be unexpected behavior for most cluster administrators because the enforcement is almost useless. Moreover, the bypass will cause unexpected file access permission. In some use cases, the unexpected file access permission will be a security concern. For example, using `hostPath` volumes could be a severe problem because UID/GIDs matter in accessing files/directories in the volumes.

Reviewer 2: This paragraph makes me believe that the OCI behavior itself is incorrect.  In short:

If a pod specifies `runAsGroup` - that is authoritative, and policy engines can assume it will be enacted.

If a pod specifies `supplementalGroups` - that _should be_ authoritative (regardless of whether `runAsGroup` is specified or not), but it is not today - neither in k8s nor OCI.  Therefore, polocy engines CANNOT rely on this.

I believe (open to argument, though) that we should define make our policy "strict", and be clear that it is not OCI compliant.  If we *need* an OCI-compliant policy, we could add that as a distinct policy (this is why we don't like bool fields!).

We should sugges to OCI folks that maybe they want to tighen this up in the spec, or at least document it :)

Reviewer 2: The problems are:

1) It seems OCI image spec doesn't actually have any affordance for supplemental groups in the image, but still expresses an opinion about the behavior of supplemental groups when converting `Config.User` ->  `process.user.additionalGids` (as opposed to letting tools define that).

2) Changing the behavior would be a breaking change, same as we are debating here, so I would expect that it would be rejected.

That said, k8s and CRI are not necessarily a strict OCI system, and we can define our semantics how we see fit.

Reviewer 9: I've opened a corresponding issue to get runtime-spec&runc eyes on this. It seems a subtle issue. But if it's inconsistent already, then perhaps it being a "breaking" change in OCI is what is needed?

Author: Thank you for opening up OCI issues.

> I believe (open to argument, though) that we should define make our policy "strict", and be clear that it is not OCI compliant. If we need an OCI-compliant policy, we could add that as a distinct policy (this is why we don't like bool fields!).
> ...
> That said, k8s and CRI are not necessarily a strict OCI system, and we can define our semantics how we see fit.

How about introducing three `SupplementalGroupsPolicy`:

- `OCIcompliant`: _current_ oci compliant mode, attach groups from `/etc/group` only when `runAsGroup` (more descriptive name would be better?)
- `Lenient` (or `IncludeGroupsInContainerImage`) (Default (current)): _always_ attaches groups from `/etc/group`.
- `Strict` or (`ExcludeGroupsInContainerImage`): _never_ attach groups from `/etc/group`

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need an OCI compliant mode (show me a use-case and I will consider it :)

How about "Merge" and "Strict" ?

Evolving from https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3620#discussion_r1096186213

1) If pod specifies neither `runAsGroup` nor `supplementalGroups`: 
  - use the primary group from the image (or runtime default if not specified)
  - OCI/docker read supplemental groups from the image
  - if k8s policy is "merge" (default): read supplemental groups from the image
  - if k8s policy is "strict": set no supplemental groups
  
2) If pod specifies `runAsGroup` but not `supplementalGroups`:
  - use the specified primary group
  - OCI/docker set no supplemental groups
  - if k8s policy is "merge" (default): read supplemental groups from the image
  - if k8s policy is "strict": set no supplemental groups

3) If pod specifies `supplementalGroups` but not `runAsGroup`:
  - use the primary group from the image (or runtime default if not specified)
  - OCI/docker merge the provided supplemental groups with groups from the image
  - if k8s policy is "merge" (default): merge the provided supplemental groups with groups from the image
  - if k8s policy is "strict": use only the provided supplemental groups

4) If pod specifies both `supplementalGroups` and `runAsGroup`:
  - use the specified primary group
  - OCI/docker use only the provided supplemental groups
  - if k8s policy is "merge" (default):  merge the provided supplemental groups with groups from the image
  - if k8s policy is "strict": use only the provided supplemental groups

Or put more simply: whether `runAsGroup` is specified or not has no bearing on `supplementalGroups`.

1) If pod does not specify `supplementalGroups`: 
  - if k8s policy is "merge" (default): read supplemental groups from the image
  - if k8s policy is "strict": set no supplemental groups
  
2) If pod specifies `supplementalGroups`:
  - if k8s policy is "merge" (default): merge the provided supplemental groups with groups from the image
  - if k8s policy is "strict": use only the provided supplemental groups

What do you think?

Author: > What do you think?

Looks good to me! I would like to confirm that your proposal is not so different than my original one except for naming, isn't it?

Author: renamed policy to `Merge` and `Strict`, and refined their description in [db3bcd3](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3620/commits/db3bcd370eef390d766e729d90a97ac1a523b4ef). PTAL.

Author: renamed policies and refined their description in db3bcd3

Kubernetes provides no API surface to prevent this bypass, although it could sometimes lead to a security concern. Because the behavior is implemented in CRI implementations actually, To mitigate this, the cluster administrators will need to deploy a custom low-level container runtime(e.g., [pfnet-research/strict-supplementalgroups-container-runtime](https://github.com/pfnet-research/strict-supplementalgroups-container-runtime)) that modifies OCI container runtime spec(`config.json`) produced by CRI implementations (e.g., containerd, cri-o). A custom `RuntimeClass` would be introduced for it. Nevertheless, It would be an extra operational burden for cluster administrators.

> Thus, this KEP proposes to offer a new API field named `SupplementalGroupsPolicy` that enables OCI-compliant behavior for supplemental groups to the first container process. The new API allows cluster administrators to deploy security policies that protect the `SupplementalGroupsPolicy` field in the cluster to avoid the unexpected bypass of `SupplementalGroups` described above.

Reviewer 2: see above comment - let's make a specific decision about whether OCI-compliance is the goal, or whether the "k8s API is authoritative when used" principle is the goal.

Reviewer 6: see above I don't think oci compliance covers client side config.json editing.. rather it covers how the final config.json will be processed.

Author: > let's make a specific decision about whether OCI-compliance is the goal, or whether the "k8s API is authoritative when used" principle is the goal.

I lean to the latter. see https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3620#discussion_r1098609784
